**1/ how did you as an artist come to VR? how would you describe your relationship/engagement/... with the medium?**

I've always been fascinated by immersion, and I was especially drawn to amusement parks. Being in an unknown place and still having the feeling that something is wrong. A too comfortable feeling of fun and lightness, conveyed by music and scenery.  My first installations experimented with immersive spaces. "Chinese Pavilion" was my first Virtual Reality work, which resulted from the examination of the pavilion in Schloss Pillnitz. For me, virtual reality is the logical extension of a consumer society that is partly based on visual illusion. Furthermore VR is a tool, that allows myself to create illusion, different worlds and link connections.

**2/ can you give us a bit of context for your work "Chinese Pavilion"? what was your personal interest or connection? how was the process to develop it in VR? what is unique about how it relates to VR?**

One year ago I lived in Dresden, as a touristic attraction I visited Schloss Pillnitz and discovered the Chinese pavilon. The Myth said, the building would be one of the best imitations of a chinese pavilon, that was build during the Chinoiserie, a  period of art, that tried to imitated chinese art craft, architecture, furniture, without caring that much about authenticity. The pavilon gave me the impression of being back in an amusement park. At one point I realized that, inside of the Pavillon  follows an immersive illusion. The painted walls suggest the visitor to be in China so one could say the pavilion itself is a 200 year old Virtual Reality just created by a different technology. For me it felt interesting to translate the old pavilon into the 21 Century and combine it with the technology we use today. Therefore, I used photogrammetry as a technique that uses images to reconstruct a digital copy of the chinese pavilion.

**3/ your work appears to the viewer as a kind of collage of different digital materials that complement and overlap each other, partly contradict each other, but still construct a common virtual space. how and why did you choose these materials and by what criteria did you arrange them?**

For me, the pavilion itself gave a certain relationship, combining 3D and 2D elements. The architectural space is delimited by murals, which in turn create a 3-dimensional feeling and a fictional view through perspective painting. A view of China constructed in Dresden, but which never existed in this way. Because of the geographical reference, I did not want to digitally create the Chinese Pavilion and the former residence of the German governor in Qingdao therefore, used a 3D scan. By translating them into digital space, the links that result from the double location can be revealed, recomposed, and experienced. The arrangement and collection of materials follow a non-linear and multi-dimensional understanding of history.  Starting from the historical-colonial and economic levels of the pavilion, I developed different scenarios, but left their composition to chance. As a result, they overlap each other palimzestically, complement each other, or fade each other out.  
It was important to me that the digitally constructed space is connect to the world we live in. Therefore, I used videos and images that we are familiar with in our everyday lives. The references of the images act as anchors. At the same time, the videos and images become independent and active objects in the virtual reality. 

**4/ can you please say a bit more about the political references of the work and what role representation plays in your work?**

Starting from different times, places, events and histories represented by the various images, videos and objects, the 'Chinese Pavilion' shows itself in many forms that it could be, but is not. It stands for a net-like construction of stories that emanate from it in order to question the original purpose of representation, the demonstration of power of the makers, by taking the construction as such to its extreme and keeping it visible. The pompous illusion of the original pavilion already abolishes itself through the erroneous transfer into VR. The disappearance of the murals creates empty spaces in the digital architecture, which are only fragmentarily filled by the emerging scenarios. In this way, the work not only dissolves the retroactively one-dimensional constructed story due to different overlapping and contradictory scenarios. But through the fissures, different medial materials and image levels, it also casts doubt on the truthfulness of representation.  One time the marching military seems to recall a military parade in front of the pavilion in Dresden, the next moment it represents the enforcement of imperialistic trade interests of the German Reich in the colony of Kiautschou. The constantly different constellations that arise open up a space in which it is no longer clear what is being represented, and make it possible to create one's own references.