**How did you as an artist come to VR? How would you describe your relationship/engagement/... with the medium?**

**Elena Romenkova:** Well, VR glasses appeared in our family about two years ago. My husband works at IC\M/T – Institute for Creative\Media/Technologies St. Pölten in the area of Experimental Media, where they research for new forms and approaches of how to use and combine new visual resources. So I decided also to explore the possibilities of this new device. I am working as a digital artist for about 5 years and started with 2D images, experimented with glitch techniques, like databending, datamoshing, and so on. Then I discovered the 3D world, and it became my main passion. I create human bodies and apply glitch techniques to them. By this, objects are getting transformed and modified in unpredictable ways. The new forms are coming, hence new meanings. VR glasses inspire me to create a 3D room with glitch sculptures in it. The VR world is so immersive and the digital environment with surreal, fictional worlds, similar to dreams and fantasies, becomes a realistic perception. VR glasses made it possible to dive into these new abstract realities. Now the doors to the world of the subconscious and the illusory opened.

**Can you give us a bit of context for your work Gliese 667 Cc? What was your personal interest or connection? How was the process to develop it in VR? Whatis unique about how it relates to VR?"**

**ER:** Gliese 667 Cc" was an experiment in art terms with new technologies. It was interesting for me to see my surreal sculptures in the virtual dimension. I thought it would be cool, to feel the size and volume of sculptures, to walk around and touch them. I wanted to be in this fantasy world with unusual objects and strange textures. It's like a waking dream, but in a dream, we cannot choose and control our actions, and VR provides such an opportunity. While working on this project, a lot of technical difficulties arose, not everything that was planned was implemented. For example, one idea was to make 3D sculptures interactive, but technically it was too complicated in my first steps. Then the work on the lights was not so easy. Initially, I planned to make the rooms completely closed, with several light sources, and it looked cool in 2D dimension but on the stereoscopic render the lightmaps were not compatible with each other, some distortion was always coming, so fast improvisation was needed, to come close as possible as I saw it in my head. There was also a difficulty with my high poly glitch sculptures, which I usually use for renderings. I carefully adapted them, so that they work in the VR world.

**Your work guides us through several "rooms" consisting of many elements – do you regard the work as a virtual exhibition or is it a single (very large) installation setting, or are these simply categories that are irrelevant to your work?**

**ER:** My roots are in the traditional and classical way of exhibiting paintings in a museum. So I transformed this idea into a virtual exhibition. It contains two rooms with open sky, one corridor and one hall room, also there are some small sections, and one room behind a glass wall. In the beginning, I planned more rooms and more sculptures, more animation, but I had to limit myself because of technical reasons. I wanted to create the atmosphere of a surreal museum, with sculptures which are alive and each room is filled with different emotions. There is also my video art included and still images on the walls. The immersion in a virtual exhibition allows perceiving an art object in a new way. 

**You chose to guide the viewer through your piece. One is de-bodied while at the same time being confronted with a multitude of digital bodies. How do you see the role of this detached, guided, automatic floating through the space?**

**ER:** After my virtual exhibition space was created, I was faced with the task of how to implement the project, of how people can experience it. First, I wanted to export it as a game. I loved the idea that the viewer can move in all directions, climb into all corners and spend as much time in each room as they want. But for people, who go through VR for the first time, it is complicated to control as a first person in the 3D world. This needs a lot of user experience, so it is much easier, with an automated guided control system. A stereoscopic 360° Video and the viewer only can choose where to look. So this can be seen with the simplest cardboard VR glasses too. New digital technologies are developing rapidly, and I hope that in the near future I will be able to implement all my ideas without technical limitations.