
The artist duo Banz&Bowinkel has been working in the field of digital art since 2009. In addition to video works and printed CGI works, they have created several works in/with augmented and virtual reality since 2014.  
<https://www.banzbowinkel.de/>

**Daniel:** As a duo you have been working together since 2009 and your Website shows printed works, one AR work and some video works before you started making and showing works in/with Virtual Reality in 2016. Could you please describe the path that brought you to VR and with what ideas and aspirations you started your first VR work?

**Banz&Bowinkel:** When we started working together, the computer was already our preferred medium. What interested us about this tool was its universal distribution and applicability, because almost everything today is controlled by computers, or processed with the help of computers. So the question we asked ourselves was: if we live in a world that is run by computers, why doesn't art use this tool to be a mirror of that world? So we started experimenting with computer generated images. Initially - as you mentioned - in the form of prints and videos, relatively classic formats.  
It became apparent to us that while these also worked well for computer-generated imagery, emerging technologies such as AR and VR offered possibilities that these formats didn't. The prospect of confronting the viewer live with the virtual worlds we were dealing with in our programs was very exciting to us. A conventional image, after all, shows its content to the viewer from a fairly fixed perspective.  
The creator of such a picture has a lot of control over how he reveals the picture to the viewer and what he lets him see. This creates a certain distance to the content of the picture. The viewer always sees the image from the position provided to him and from a safe distance. With AR - and VR even more so - it's different: what I see is interactively adapted by the computer. The image reacts to the viewer. The result is a more immersive experience of the image. The virtual world becomes more immediate - it surrounds you. Anyone who has put on VR glasses for the first time will not forget this experience so quickly.  
When we conceptualized our first VR work, the question was therefore relevant for us: where do you actually end up when you enter a virtual world? We found it boring, for example, to recreate reality in VR. That already existed. And much better than we would have been able to realize in VR. So we wanted to find images for the Virtual. Our question was: what does the Virtual actually look like when you can see it? And we wanted to work symbolically - with symbols. For us, the virtual world is a form of language. We are very influenced by Flusser.  


**D:** What lessons for your artistic work have you learned so far from working with/in VR? What is the relationship between idea and realization? Can you tell us about important points on the way in between that are inherent to the work with/in VR?

**B&B:** When we started making art in AR and VR, we realized that they are genres of their own within the field of art. Just like photography, painting, or video art. The difference is that AR and VR are still at the beginning of their own history. Just like photography in the middle of the 19th century. Or video art in the 60s of the 20th century. AR and VR are blank sheets of paper that have to be written on yet, and what will be the canon of these media in a few decades, nobody can actually know today. What is very interesting for us about media is the generative aspect. In other words, a work that changes - whose algorithm is such that it continually keeps the work going. And which reacts to the viewer. For us, these are aspects that distinguish computer-generated art from other media. If it is set up correctly, the computer generates the work in real time and can then react to its environment accordingly.  
Regarding the relationship between idea and realization: the realization of almost any idea quickly becomes costly in AR and VR. With increasing experience, we are now better able to estimate this ratio and therefore first try to discuss exactly what a particular idea means in terms of effort for development. But because the medium is so young, little is predictable and often we have to let ourselves float again to find a good solution from an idea. This is often still very tedious and time-consuming. It often takes us a very long time until a work is ready. For us it is also often the case that the look of the work - not so much its concept - changes a lot over the course of its development. We also have the feeling that VR work in particular is somehow never finished. You can always keep working on it. One update to the engine and all of a sudden things can be done that previously had to be discarded as too elaborate. Of course, then there's the stimulus to pick it up again and improve it. After all, the software is constantly evolving. That's actually an interesting characteristic of the medium. You wouldn't shoot a film again because you now have "better" actors or a setting is finally accessible. A VR work behaves differently. More like the successive versions of a software program. We already have different versions of Palo Alto, for example, PaloAlto 00 - that's the beta version, then 01, 02 ... that's where we currently stopped.  


**D:** Do you see a boundary between medium and work, and if so, where does it lie in VR? In the accompanying text by Wade Wallerstein to the work 'Palo Alto' it says that the work negotiates a 'hypothetical' virtual reality. Could you please describe this negotiation from your point of view?

**B&B:** McLuhan said "The medium is the massage". For us, that's exactly where the boundary between medium and work lies. We now distinguish quite precisely which ideas we realize and how. So something becomes a printed image, or a video, or an AR work, and so on. The sum of these individual - medially different - works would then be described as a body of work. All of our work actually revolves around the question of being human in a cybernetic, computer-controlled world and its conditions, which are also set by us humans. The hypothetical virtual reality refers to the fact that we are always looking for symbolic images for certain facts. The "real" virtual reality does not look like in our works. It is a binary sequence of numbers on a storage medium. We will only know what virtual reality looks like in the computer when we have turned ourselves into computers - which hopefully will never happen and most likely will not be possible at all. What we can do, however, is to create a kind of auxiliary construct that helps us to understand what is actually happening in this virtual world. And in our case this construct consists of symbolic images. Like hieroglyphics. The religions and then the sciences do nothing else in principle. And art has always done it that way, too. Or did we really believe that in the afterlife it looks like on a retable of Bosch?  


**D:** What software and hardware do you use for your works and to what extent do their design/the way they work have an impact on your work? Where are these technical preconditions productive and where do you counteract and try to bypass them?

**B&B:** We work with PCs. Apart from that, we use Unity3D, Cinema4D, Realflow, MaxwellRender and all the Adobe programs for post-processing. In the meantime, we try to keep the number of programs we use as minimal as possible.  
The influence of the software on the work is of course huge insofar as the programs determine what you can do. But within a program genre (i.e. game engine, 3D program, or editing program), it is irrelevant in our eyes whether something was done with 3DS-Max or Cinema4D. In principle, these programs are all capable of doing the same things. What is important is their compatibility with each other. The same goes for game engines: it doesn't matter if they are node-based or scripted, and we don't really care about the visual nuances. This is like debating whether you can only take good photos with a Hasselblad. In our eyes, that's nonsense. What counts for us is the concept of the work - the idea. So what is a work about? What does it represent?  
Regarding the technical conditionality of the work, of course, it is the case that, especially with game engines, completely different scenarios are anticipated in the development of the software than, for example, that art is made with it. The engines are mostly developed for large studios, where hundreds of highly specialized employees work on the new Shooter, which then also recovers the few hundred milliards that such a development costs. What we do is completely different. There are two of us, and shooters are not art. So the way these programs work is a challenge when you start working with them as an artist. But art, and then also VR art, starts in the head. Everything else is just a question of how you find your way to the right output from that point. You also have that problem in front of the canvas with a brush and oil paint. The difficulty lies more in the expectations of the public. Today, for example, no one expects a painter to be able to paint like Caravaggio. People quickly apply the same standards to a VR artist as they do to a major games company. And in the process, it's being concealed that for 20 years they've been doing nothing but: a hand with a gun points at any number of opponents and shoots them in ever more lush visual violence ... Art works differently and has to. That is where its quality lies. It has to do with thinking - by the way, an activity computers still have a hard time with.

**D:** How do you look at other artists' artwork in VR? As artists, have you developed a sensorium to look at other works through a special lens?

**B&B:** Because we do VR ourselves and have the Internet, we can of course recognize relatively quickly who has copied the very first tutorial on YouTube. Basically, we are always interested in whether someone has created something original. Something you haven't seen ten times before. As far as that's concerned, we're clearly committed to art as avant-garde. What we also find boring is when studios go to artists who have no background in digital art themselves and persuade them to come up with something in VR that this studio then realizes for them. For us, that's like someone making a business out of offering video artists that he could also paint pictures for them. In our eyes, that doesn't work, especially at such an early stage of a medium. If you do it yourself, you can recognize relatively well who is doing something out of real devotion, out of inner necessity. Only in this way is it possible to elicit the secret of the material. Everything else is uninteresting.

**D:** Where is art going with/in VR? What do you wish for the future? Do you observe developments that you view critically or with concern?

**B&B:** Our wish for the future is that VR art finds its audience as an autonomous art genre and is collected there. Only in this way can VR artists pursue their work and create new art. We also wish that the potential of this art genre can be fully developed. The world we live in has changed radically through the use of computers. We cannot grasp this world if we do not use the computer as its incremental component in the arts. We are convinced that it is only by engaging with this tool that we humans can master the challenges of the 21st century. Art can contribute to this. Unfortunately, the questioning of this tool is still hardly established in the mainstream. Most people prefer to do their shopping on Amazon. It sometimes seems to us like in the Middle Ages, when in church one could really tell the people, as a horde of illiterates, everything that was supposedly written in the Bible. And those who did that became filthy rich with the trade of this sovereign knowledge. We are of the opinion that the greatest danger and the greatest damage to our contemporary society arises from the ignorance of the technological conditions of our reality. As cultural workers we feel an urgent responsibility to try to take a step in the right direction with our work.  
In art, this could mean that the interpretive authority over VR art should not be hijacked by a few big collectors who exhibit what they are offered as investment assets by big studios and major galleries. We need a diverse scene, supported by a broad base of art enthusiasts. Only then will we really get to know the full richness of this medium.

