Ivana Druzetic is part of the MIREVI team (Mixed Reality and  Visualization) at the University of Applied Sciences Düsseldorf since 2018 where she manages several projects at the intersection of art and mixed media technologies. Ivana graduated in cultural studies (BA) at the University of Rijeka (Croatia) and in cultural anthropology and museum studies (MA) at the University of Zagreb (Croatia). During the past ten years she has gained a considerable working experience in the field of creative industries, cultural project management and development of participative art projects on international level.

**D:** Hallo Ivana. Thanks for taking the time for this exchange! I'd like to start with a perhaps more general question, which is of course already posed with regard to art, its conditions of production and also its mode of operation: What role do you think plays in general virtual reality for society? Where and how does this technology change society?

**I:** Hey Daniel! Thank you for including me in the conversation about this exciting topic!  
Well, since the question is very wide, I will allow myself to be a bit abstract. I perceive Virtual Reality as some sort of mirror of our society. It is an extremely pliable tool that offers endless possibilities, and yet its limitations are more often reflecting our mental limitations than the technological ones - the patterns in which we think and various causal relationships that we are used to. And I find this very interesting. On the one hand, VR challenges us to reproduce the reality that we know the best we can, but on the other, it is also offering the chance of creating something completely different instead. And what we will choose to do or happen to enjoy depends on us, not the technology itself. And one could say that VR is no different than any other medium in that sense – artists have been choosing to be figurative or abstract for centuries and we have been enjoying it or not. But the element that VR is introducing is the feeling of presence, the feeling of “being there”. And it is fascinating that the level of (graphic) realism or even causality is not necessarily positively correlated with the level of our feeling of presence. And again, while this will motivate some of us to question the intricate nature of our minds, some will simply have fun and not think too much about it. This again depends on us, not the technology itself.

**D:** The environments we enter into in Virtual Reality almost always hold the possibility for a code-based & algorithm-controlled experience - designed in all details, prepared in all possibilities. Are these environments really interactive and/or participatory? How does interaction/participation differ here from e.g. a board game or a participatory theater play?

**I:** It doesn´t really, they are all more or less controlled and just happening in a different medium. But it might be interesting here to widen the level of comparison and to think about everyday life as an experience possibility. From Goffman´s dramaturgical theory of social action to latest theories of performativity, we and the conditions we live in are highly coded with all sorts of symbolic meanings. We are surrounded with binary codes, logical operators, translators and decoders. They might be much more complex or badly written since the developers are changing constantly and no one can trace what the other one wrote, but our play, our experience of interaction and participation do function according to them. In that sense, I don´t think that design acts as a limitation in VR, it is actually an opportunity to create a little playground with its own set of rules, independent of the ones surrounding it.

**D:** How could one describe these environments in general? Is it possible to describe them in a general way, similar to a term like forest or beach or cellar? Which aspects are noteworthy, archetypal?

**I:** Following your mythological-new-age-Freudian terminology I can say it´s an island (with a small forest), I am mostly sailing or swimming towards it, but it too often disappears as soon as I lay my foot on it. For me it´s all about detachment - from known rules, from expected events, but also still from my body as well. Even though VR is relaying exactly on its power to capture both the mind and the body, I am personally so distracted by the feeling of heavy VR googles on my head that just rare VR applications have managed to make me forget about my real body. In that sense, I still find the “suspension of disbelief” the main mechanism for achieving the celebrated presence. For me, it´s still more about “not being here” than “being there”. Being absent, more than being present. On the way to an island.

**D:** Many visitors of museums and galleries have had their first experience in virtual reality over the last years. There are also some branches/sectors that are more strongly associated with the medium than others (e.g. gaming, telemedicine or even the military). Which also means that from now on visitors will have a visual experience and classification of upcoming Virtual Reality experiences. What can one imagine what people now feel/expect to be different? What can and will artists do differently?

**I:** The industry is definitely setting the bar quite high, but I don´t think that art should compete with industry for attention. I also believe that people who appreciate art do not draw parallels, or at least don´t use the same set of criteria for both. Otherwise, this would be the same as comparing video art to Hollywood movies, with all due respect to the artistic value of Hollywood production (or gaming industry in that sense). Having said that, we cannot ignore the fact that the production conditions for VR art are very much differing from any other artistic medium, insofar that artists usually have to heavily rely on the VR developers. Partly because of that, but also many other processes that are nowadays happening in the cultural field in general, artists are also often collaborating with industry. This kind of coupling is a great opportunity for the artists to develop works that are maybe keeping up with the production level of the industry, but still, hopefully, harnessing those skills for realization of ideas that are at least one reality away from the market ones.

**D:** What criteria could be used to discuss art in virtual reality? To criticize, praise or even evaluate them?

**I:** Usually, the first criteria that I have in mind for any VR work, artistic or not, is whether the VR form offers any additional value or is it simply used for the sake of attraction. Could the same message be delivered by other means more effectively? It is still very easy to attract with VR and its “novelty affect” in any field of application is very strong, sometimes even distracting from its very objective or concealing the fact that the intention is missing. However, when it comes to evaluation criteria in art, we find ourselves on a very slippery ground. Any criteria according to which VR applications are evaluated in other fields (for example in education, medicine or journalism), such as intuitive user experience, good storytelling or the quality of 3D graphics, can in artistic context be intentionally ignored, transgressed, or a completely different logic can be applied to it. And as long as the reason for doing this is constitutive for the artistic intention, this should be respected as such. Maybe the only clear criteria here is that it should be motion sickness free. But when it comes to art, we should bear in mind – ´if not intended´, there are many things on this world that makes us nauseous, why not art as well? Maybe the visitor should feel insecure, confused and lost in the process. If not, it´s a failure. I think that an evaluation of a VR artwork can only be made on a case-by-case basis.

**D:** What kind of artwork in virtual reality is worth exhibiting in galleries and museums and why?

**I:** This is very closely related to the last question, but I can try to change the focus a bit from the technical elements that construct a VR piece to the dimensions on which it relies. Like no other medium, VR is encompassing a 3-dimensional space, offering a multisensory feedback, interaction with the space and other actors within the space. These possibilities should be ideally used to its fullest in order to make sense of the medium. I think that artists are often not aware of those possibilities and are reducing VR to a mere 3D space. In addition to that, VR is also inevitably “nested” in reality. Reality is its negative space. I think that a VR work worth of attention is also the one that is playing with some of those elements – dimensions, senses, agency, being aware of its negative space and using it in its own advantage rather than evading it. Otherwise, it better be good and make you forget about the real space completely :)

**D:** Where does Virtual Reality go? What can we expect and what should we pay attention to?

**I:** Virtual reality in general is fiercely moving in direction of more complete and faithful representation of people and objects in the virtual space - from face and body tracking to creation of realistic 3D objects and spaces through photogrammetry and laser scanning. Multiuser and collaborative spaces have been a big challenge and have also gained on importance this year due to the pandemic and an increased need for telepresence. In that sense, we could expect that in the coming years not only individual artworks but even whole museums take virtual forms, including the artists and the visitors. A very exciting but kind of frightening thought as well. It shouldn´t be seen as a substitute for reality or a substitute for art in general. 