**1/ how did you as an artist come to VR? how would you describe your relationship/engagement/... with the medium?**

Through my work, I examine what I call the ‘spectacles of consumer culture’ – drawing from Guy Debord’s *La Société du spectacle* – particularly in relation to everyday technologies. I am interested in the ways the digital devices that surround us are intertwined with promises of the new, the innovative and ideas of ‘progress.’ In this sense, I always approach everyday technologies in the first place as ideological instruments that are closely connected to the ‘myth of progress’ that is at the core of consumer capitalism and which philosopher John Gray describes as ‘the dream that new technologies will conjure away the immemorial evils of human life’. In other words, my interest in using a certain medium is usually primarily motivated by its symbolic and ideological role in the cultural landscape and not necessarily by its technical possibilities.
<br><br>
This is also the case in my engagement with Virtual Reality technology. I do find the technical aspects interesting, but I would not have started to work with it if there hadn’t been such a big hype around it, with inflated promises such as “it’s the future of media”, “the future of art” and so forth. My relationship with the medium is underpinned by cultural criticism of technology. This doesn’t mean that I am a technophobe or an anti-VR activist, but rather that I believe that we must dissect everything that comes from Big Tech and mainstream consumerism through a radical, Frankfurt School-like negativity in order to be able to reclaim it for a non-alienating techno-culture with people’s lifeworlds as its primary concern, rather than market growth. 

**2/ can you give us a bit of context for your work The Grass Smells So Sweet? what was your personal interest or connection? how was the process to develop it in VR? what is unique about how it relates to VR?**

The initial motivation for the work was brought to me by the algorithms of the Q&A forum Quora.com. I had been looking at private accounts of violence and warfare in preparation of a [project I did on the frontline in the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2017](https://www.furtherfield.org/fronterlebnis-boys-toys-frontline-summary/)→ and since then my daily digest had been dominated by topics in this domain. I was intrigued that on several occasions there were questions by people who wanted to know what it is like to be shot, which were answered by a remarkably diverse range of people in varying narrative styles. Especially the fascination with the headshot struck me. To me, it feels close to the ultimate question, related to ‘What does it feel like to die?’ At the same time, it seems to reflect the rather perverse and banal, commonplace focus on headshots in computer games and Hollywood cinema. It is both intimate and superficial.
<br><br>
On one hand, I felt that these threads gave insights into how people’s continued occupation with the physical body in relation to violence and (fear of) death is mediated and processed in a digitally networked culture. On the other, the extreme nature of the experiences described and the impossibility to convey them accurately interested me because they bring to the fore the limitations of what the medium can convey. The text-based online platforms from which the source material of the work stem are very particular in their relationship to the online space in that they allow you to act anonymously or while pretending to be somebody else  (‘On the Internet nobody knows you’re a dog’). However, the text-based nature also means that accounts of experiences are limited to descriptions that require the reader to imagine sound, vision, smell and haptic aspects. Every medium has its own limitations and I became interested in remediating these narratives through different media to both give a diverse, richer access to these intense and touching first person reports – which I felt touch on an insecurity around death that remains at the core of contemporary high-tech culture – as well as conduct a study of sorts around the limits of mediation with digital technologies.
<br><br>
I’m not sure if it is ‘unique,’ but *The Grass Smells So Sweet* positions VR in traditions of digital culture, rather than film and photography: it remediates text-based exchanges from online platforms, focused on phenomenological experiences. Thus, it diverts from commonplace film-based VR practices that implement visual narratives based on representation. The phenomenology-driven approach of the work also means that it is an exploration of ways to use VR in the context of the strategies and aesthetics of contemporary art, rather than cinematic spectacle. The visual starting point of the work – an endless field of grass under a blue sky – is kept deliberately simple to challenge (or frustrate) audience’s expectation of high-fidelity representational environments when they put on a VR headset. Instead, the actual event of the work concerns an incident that is arguably beyond representation; as the forum texts that constitute the basis of the work already show, near death-experiences can hardly be approximated through mediation, be it through text or a VR environment. Instead of promoting a promise of VR as the way towards technological immediacy, this work engages with the medium’s limits.

**3/ you repeat many elements across different mediums. is this common in your artistic practice? do you regard VR as special in how it re-presents other mediums?**

Remediation of material across different media formats is indeed a tactic that runs through a lot of my work. For example, for my short film *patrol* (2017), I documented soldiers on the frontline in the Russo-Ukrainian War with my smartphone while they were operating mid-20th weapons and state-of-the-art mobile consumer devices. I transferred the digital footage to 16mm film to further heighten the seeming temporal disjunction between the technologies on the battle field (new digital devices, old guns) through incorporation of the connotations of 16mm film as a typical 20th century war journalism format. Similarly, my C-print photo series *European Studies #1* (2019) uses the aesthetics of mid-20th century analogue photography to frame the newly erected, so-called ‘smart fences’ on the EU outer borders as regressive reincarnations of the Iron Curtain, rather than the high-tech innovations border agencies would like us to believe they are.
<br><br>
VR has its own technological and aesthetic characteristics when its comes to the ways it remediates other media, but I don’t consider these ‘special’ in themselves. They’re different and in some ways more sophisticated than what was available before (but not in all aspects: in my opinion, early 20th century stereoscopy is still far superior to contemporary VR headsets when it comes to viewing 3D still imagery). What is special about VR is that, when we look at the way it is perceived in everyday culture, it is currently surrounded by the aura of the new and the avant-garde. In this way, it plays a similar role as motion pictures in the late 19th century and Polaroid photography in the 1950s. In this context, VR is also closely tied to promises of ‘immediacy’ as described by media theorists Bolter and Grusin in their book *Remediation* from the early 2000s. They point out that whenever a new medium is introduced, it tends to be surrounded by excited claims that ‘we are almost there’ in terms of the ability to represent the world in a way that makes the difference between mediation and reality imperceptible. However, each time a newer medium is introduced, it becomes clear that the promises surrounding the previous one were exaggerated and overtly optimistic. Think of 19th century still photography, the motion pictures of the Lumière brothers or the VR environments of the 1990s: all of these were once accompanied by the claim that it’s ‘almost like reality.’

**4/ you write that you want to "challenge (or frustrate) [the] audience’s expectation of high-fidelity representational environments when they put on a VR headset" – what do you hope to open up through this challenge/frustation? why do you still want to work with VR?**

I hope the work will challenge the commonplace narrative of VR as a medium for a kind of enhanced realism – ‘everyday life, but better’ – and instead propose it as a technology for experiences that collide with the ready-made expectations of life as they are promoted by global media culture. A strategy of estrangement in the Brechtian sense, you could say. 
<br><br>
I am interested to continue to work with VR for the reason given in my first answer: I see it as a medium that is at the forefront of myths of realism and immediacy in late capitalism. The promises of technology as harbinger of innovation, progress and endless growth are inscribed in the way VR technologies are hyped and perceived. In the 1980s, Jean Baudrillard wrote about Disneyland as the best place to study the reality of Western consumer capitalism. Rather than an imaginary, idealized version of reality, Baudrillard argued that Main Street U.S.A. had become a model after which everyday life has been designed.
<br><br>
I think that, approaching the middle of the 21st century, Virtual Reality technology may become the Main Street of the Global Village. A polished simulacrum of life, after which our aspirations for IRL existence may be modeled. To me, this speculation is both of interest to study as a cultural phenomenon, and to disrupt in order to challenge the alienating processes of hyper-consumerism. Through such disruptions – which may take the form of literal shock as is the case in *The Grass Smells So Sweet* – some chances to peak through the cracks in the medium’s commonplace narratives might occur and reveal possibilities for alternate modes of operation and application.