**How did you as an artist come to VR? How would you describe your relationship/engagement/... with the medium?**

**Matias Brunacci:** I remember when I was just a child, I used to play with my toys in a way that I later realized was not very casual or simple. For me, it was not enough to generate simple stories between them. I remember having a particular story behind each one of these toys which were connected in-between as a rhizomatic constellation of indelible narratives, but not only that, there were factions, different groups, and consequently, different worlds where they lived. These worlds were represented with structures and objects that I arranged again and again around them, the protagonists of my stories. Later, as I entered adolescence, I realized that these toy worlds were no longer enough to represent the ideas and sensations I was living at that time, and it was at that moment when I began my audiovisual artistic research. I was always a very curious person, any kind of software or creative tool (you name it!) that was within my reach was absorbed by this imperious need of knowledge about data processing. The input, the output, and all that wonderful universe that existed exactly in between. Later on, I discovered that through VR I could represent everything that crossed my mind in a direct and precise way. This sensation is for me a point of no return. I always dreamed of go in instead of look at...

**Can you give us a bit of context for your work Virtualshamanism? What was your personal interest or connection? How was the process to develop it in VR? What is unique about how it relates to VR?**

**MB:** Virtualshamanism was my thesis project during my university studies in Argentina and Germany. I was always fascinated by the power and possibilities of using and blending the well-known trident of art, science, and technology to predict and represent situations and contexts otherwise impossible to achieve with more conventional tools. I consider that technology is a completely neutral medium in itself, it can in a bad way generate very big social-political conflicts (social networks, privacy, bubble algorithms), but at the same time help a deaf person to hear, or a blind person to find his way. This work tries to stay right in the middle, generating a direction that can only grow from the stimulation, participation, and predisposition of the user himself. Virtualshamanism is based on the studies on what is known as Technoshamanism, written by the Brazilian researcher Fabian M. Borges, especially the technology of shamanism (shamanism seen as a technology for the production of knowledge); and the shamanism of technology (the pursuit of shamanic powers through the use of technology). In this way, this work does not try to simulate a mystical-shamanic journey, but to find a middle ground between the ancestral and the futuristic.

**You use the viewer's physical hands as an input device. What intrigues you about dissolving the boundary between 'this' world and the 'VR' world? What is your personal relationship to the body's physicalness in VR?**

**MB:** Immersion is one of the most important things in the realization of a virtual reality work. In the case of Virtualshamanism, my goal was to achieve a non-invasive interaction system, erasing the barriers between the user and the device. I needed a system in which the user would feel comfortable and with the possibility of interacting with their environment without the need to worry about understanding that extra technical layer, that is why the work does not have any tactile or visual interface system, to navigate between worlds just look at the palms of your hands for a few seconds to jump to another place. Nothing simpler and stronger than that. When we are born, the hands are one of the first forms that we recognize and assimilate as our own, we are very trained with them and it is what usually distinguishes us from most animals. Not only in a practical way, for example, Castaneda, in one of his books, explains how Don Juan shows him a technique to have lucid dreams that include looking at the palm of his hands 10 minutes a day while repeating out loud "I am in control", so that later, during sleep, he can also see his hands and begin to acquire the ability to control his dreams and the infinite possibilities that this implies on an oneiric-spiritual level. 

**Your piece suggests VR can open up new states of consciousness. Is this based on your personal experience in VR? Where do you think these altered states of consciousness in VR could lead us?**

**MB:** I definitely think technology could help us better understand human nature. Through the use of virtual reality, we can not only heal traumas or deal with symbols, fears, or specific situations in a controlled and safe way, but we can also represent universes that were previously only possible to be visualized in a very abstract way through intricate mathematical models. Take 4D as an example, a 3D representation that adds the dimension of time to the spatial dimensions of length, width, and depth. For years and years we have had to elaborate diverse and complex explanations about this physical-mathematical phenomenon, today it is as simple as seeing it before your very eyes rotating in the form of a hypercube in virtual reality. This is the tip of the iceberg, artists play a very important role in exploiting these phenomena through their research and experiments. We are still trying to understand what is in there, the truth is that no matter how casual was your connection or relationship with virtual reality, we all know that there is something very powerful in it. You can enter virtual reality if you want to, but you can only get out of it if you can. You don't get out of an experience, you just escape from it, but there is always something that remains, that which stays with you forever and has the possibility of accompanying you throughout your life as if it were a beautiful dream. Those are the tools for a new state of consciousness, and they are there within reach to be used and shared.